e2e/README.md, before:

## E2E tests

Integration tests depends on LXD. The following procedure shows
how to get everything installed on Ubuntu 22.04.

### Installing LXD

You can install LXD using snap:

```
$ snap install lxd
$ lxd init --auto
```
Once LXD is configured you need to set up ovn so we can create isolated
networks:

```
$ sudo apt install ovn-host ovn-central -y
$ sudo ovs-vsctl set open_vswitch . \
   external_ids:ovn-remote=unix:/var/run/ovn/ovnsb_db.sock \
   external_ids:ovn-encap-type=geneve \
   external_ids:ovn-encap-ip=127.0.0.1
```

If you have problems setting up ovn you can check their docs:
https://documentation.ubuntu.com/lxd/en/latest/howto/network_ovn_setup/

### Test workflow

Scripts inside the `scripts` directory are copied to all nodes.
If you have a new test you want to add then start by creating a
shell script to execute it and save it under the `scripts` dir.
You can then call the script from your Go code.

### Running all the tests

You can run the tests from within this directory:

```
$ make e2e-tests
```

### Running individual tests

You an run a single test with:

```
$ make e2e-test TEST_NAME=TestSomething
```

TestSomething is the name of the test function you want to run.

### Adding more tests

To add more tests you just need to create one inside this directory
and then add it to the `.github/workflows/e2e.yaml` file.


### Kots test application

During end to end tests we embed a license for a smoke test kots app,
this app can be found under the 'Replicated, Inc.' team on staging:

https://vendor.staging.replicated.com/apps/embedded-cluster-smoke-test-staging-app

Make sure to update the application yaml files under kots-release-onmerge
and kots-release-onpr directories if you create a new release of the remote
application.

### Testim

We use [Testim](https://www.testim.io/) to run end to end tests on the UI. The tests live within the
"Embedded Cluster" Testim project.

When a git branch is pushed to GitHub, a cooresponding branch is created in
Testim. The on-PR tests will run against the matching branch in Testim, so if you need
to make changes to the tests as part of your PR, you should make those updates in your
Testim branch.

When a PR is merged, the on-merge tests will run against the master branch in Testim.
If you have made changes to the tests in your Testim branch, you should merge those changes
to the master branch in Testim when merging your PR. Similarly, if you rebase your git
branch from main, you may need to "rebase" your Testim branch (merge changes from master)
if there have been changes to the tests.

For more details on version control in Testim, refer to the [Testim documentation](https://help.testim.io/docs/version-control-branches).

Commit message:

Use Playwright instead of testIM (#596)
* Use Playwright instead of testIM

e2e/README.md, after:

## E2E tests

Integration tests depends on LXD. The following procedure shows
how to get everything installed on Ubuntu 22.04.

### Installing LXD

You can install LXD using snap:

```
$ snap install lxd
$ lxd init --auto
```
Once LXD is configured you need to set up ovn so we can create isolated
networks:

```
$ sudo apt install ovn-host ovn-central -y
$ sudo ovs-vsctl set open_vswitch . \
   external_ids:ovn-remote=unix:/var/run/ovn/ovnsb_db.sock \
   external_ids:ovn-encap-type=geneve \
   external_ids:ovn-encap-ip=127.0.0.1
```

If you have problems setting up ovn you can check their docs:
https://documentation.ubuntu.com/lxd/en/latest/howto/network_ovn_setup/

### Test workflow

Scripts inside the `scripts` directory are copied to all nodes.
If you have a new test you want to add then start by creating a
shell script to execute it and save it under the `scripts` dir.
You can then call the script from your Go code.

### Running all the tests

You can run the tests from within this directory:

```
$ make e2e-tests
```

### Running individual tests

You an run a single test with:

```
$ make e2e-test TEST_NAME=TestSomething
```

TestSomething is the name of the test function you want to run.

### Adding more tests

To add more tests you just need to create one inside this directory
and then add it to the `.github/workflows/e2e.yaml` file.


### Kots test application

During end to end tests we embed a license for a smoke test kots app,
this app can be found under the 'Replicated, Inc.' team on staging:

https://vendor.staging.replicated.com/apps/embedded-cluster-smoke-test-staging-app

Make sure to update the application yaml files under kots-release-onmerge
and kots-release-onpr directories if you create a new release of the remote
application.

### Playwright

We use [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) to run end to end tests on the UI.
The tests live in the `playwright` directory.

For more details on how to write tests with Playwright, refer to the [Playwright documentation](https://playwright.dev/docs/writing-tests).
